{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Arial;}}\fs22\pard\sa200\sb140
\par
INDIGENOUS COOPERATIVE SYSTEMS: A COMPARATIVE REPORT\par
\par
\par
Executive Summary. We compare four Indigenous cooperatives across membership, finance, operations, partnerships, markets, technology, culture, geography, and risk. The throughline is coherence: the healthiest systems align governance, cadence, partnerships, and capital with community purpose.\par
Many Nations scales a national member-owned brokerage with disciplined review and product fit; RSF rebuilds fisheries economics by replacing extractive intermediaries with transparent, community-centered value chains; Allottees asserts land-first governance and conservative risk, converting planning into operational prototypes; RTZ channels a vibrant artist ecosystem into emerging markets that now require formal scaffolding.\par
Findings derive from normalized metrics and direct quotations with line citations.\par
\par
\par
METHODS\par
\par
\par
We coded a shared schema from four interviews, recording values only where supported by text; unknowns were assigned -1. Normalization and evidence notes preserve traceability; quotations include inline citations (e.g., [file Lx-Ly]).\par
\par
\par
PART I: CASE STUDIES\par
\par
\par
\par
ALLOTTEES (E' NUMU DIIP)\par
\par
\par
Allottees (E' Numu Diip) reports 17 members, revenue bracket code 1, and 12 formal reviews per year. Staffing: full-time 0; contract -1; partners 6; grants 4. Innovation and offerings: 4/4; cultural integration/preservation: 3/3.\par
Operations: equipment 0; external processing 0; nonmember labor 1. Risks and adaptation: challenges 5; climate/market adaptations 3.\par
\par
"Cheryl 04:42 Our Cooperative was formed in 2017 the E' Numu Allottee Association was formed in 2014" [allottees.txt L25]\par
\par
"Cheryl 05:28 you mean of our co-op? Yes, please. Right now we only have 17.\par
We are working on the bylaws still. But we hope to have 22 however, there are 30, approximately 30 landowners." [allottees.txt L37]\par
\par
Interpretation. Indicators are read in relation to mission and pacing; unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews, not defects.\par
\par
\par
DM, RSF (FISHERY CO-OP)\par
\par
\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) reports 5 members, revenue bracket code 5, and 4 formal reviews per year. Staffing: full-time 2; contract 2; partners 6; grants 2. Innovation and offerings: 4/6; cultural integration/preservation: 4/3.\par
Operations: equipment 1; external processing 1; nonmember labor 1. Risks and adaptation: challenges 5; climate/market adaptations 4.\par
\par
"PS: How long have you so you've been with a cooperative since the beginning? When did it start? DM: We were formally registered as a fishery as a cooperative and under British Columbia Law in 2014.\par
But I started, we started our team started working on this around 2004. So, it took us ten years of best practices, tables and workshops, and thinking about what we needed before we got to the point where we created a cooperative." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L13]\par
\par
"PS: How many people are employed? DM: There are only four of us that are employed in the cooperative, and there's out of that only two of us are full time. Okay?\par
And I'm not one of those." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L15]\par
\par
Interpretation. Indicators are read in relation to mission and pacing; unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews, not defects.\par
\par
\par
MANY NATIONS (INSURANCE CO-OP)\par
\par
\par
Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) reports 250 members, revenue bracket code 5, and 12 formal reviews per year. Staffing: full-time 10; contract 20; partners 3; grants 1. Innovation and offerings: 3/3; cultural integration/preservation: 2/2.\par
Operations: equipment 0; external processing -1; nonmember labor -1. Risks and adaptation: challenges 4; climate/market adaptations 1.\par
\par
"TH 04:09 We have what 100. And oh, I should have I should have grabbed that number off the top of my head. We weren't going to 170 nations, but there's a few in there that uh, but 250 members." [manynations.txt L49]\par
\par
"TH 03:52 We have about 10 staff that are directly employed, and then we work with approximately 20 independent advisors of in various regions across the country." [manynations.txt L43]\par
\par
Interpretation. Indicators are read in relation to mission and pacing; unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews, not defects.\par
\par
\par
RTZ (ARTISTS CO-OP)\par
\par
\par
RTZ (Artists Co-op) reports 46 members, revenue bracket code 2, and -1 formal reviews per year. Staffing: full-time 0; contract 2; partners 5; grants 2. Innovation and offerings: 3/4; cultural integration/preservation: 3/3.\par
Operations: equipment -1; external processing -1; nonmember labor -1. Risks and adaptation: challenges 5; climate/market adaptations 1.\par
\par
"KQ: Okay, do you have a ballpark number? How many members are in the coop? KE: Oh, I'm sure CG probably has a better idea.\par
CG: Yeah, I believe there's about 17 or 18. I think they actually might be a little bit higher. Originally, I know when we started there was about what, maybe 20.\par
KE: Almost 30. And it kind of kept dwindling at that point. Since the partnership with the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project, under our mentorship programs, we've had an additional 13 members as part of it.\par
So it should be, I would say about close to 40 adult members and then maybe about 8 youth members. I don't know about new apprenticeships, there might be a little bit more, but for the past two and a half years has been kind of stagnant about 30 members I would say. KQ: Okay, do you have any other information you want to share about the partnership?\par
KE: I guess to kind of put it out more of that or give more information about the artist's apprenticeship. We have partnered with tribal organization here in Yallane called the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project. They have a three-year grant where they are teaching art apprenticeships, three different art apprenticeships a year.\par
And our partnership with them is we give those apprentices a place to display the work. So, they actually become Artisans Co-op members, as well as the mentors teaching. These classes are kind of utilized from the art artists database that we have here within the organization.\par
And so, it's a pretty good partnership. So far, we are the second apprenticeship. And we've seen some growth happening with that partnership." [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L14]\par
\par
Interpretation. Indicators are read in relation to mission and pacing; unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews, not defects.\par
\par
\par
PART II: COMPARATIVE NARRATIVE\par
\par
\par
\par
MEMBERSHIP AND CONSTITUENCY\par
\par
\par
Membership and Constituency shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many members are currently in good standing? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 17, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 250, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 46.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many members are currently in good standing? = 17. "Cheryl 05:28 you mean of our co-op?\par
Yes, please. Right now we only have 17. We are working on the bylaws still.\par
But we hope to have 22 however, there are 30, approximately 30 landowners." [allottees.txt L37]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many members are currently in good standing? = 5.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many members are currently in good standing? = 250. "TH 04:09 We have what 100.\par
And oh, I should have I should have grabbed that number off the top of my head. We weren't going to 170 nations, but there's a few in there that uh, but 250 members." [manynations.txt L49]\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many members are currently in good standing? = 46. "KQ: Okay, do you have a ballpark number?\par
How many members are in the coop? KE: Oh, I'm sure CG probably has a better idea. CG: Yeah, I believe there's about 17 or 18.\par
I think they actually might be a little bit higher. Originally, I know when we started there was about what, maybe 20. KE: Almost 30.\par
And it kind of kept dwindling at that point. Since the partnership with the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project, under our mentorship programs, we've had an additional 13 members as part of it. So it should be, I would say about close to 40 adult members and then maybe about 8 youth members.\par
I don't know about new apprenticeships, there might be a little bit more, but for the past two and a half years has been kind of stagnant about 30 members I would say. KQ: Okay, do you have any other information you want to share about the partnership? KE: I guess to kind of put it out more of that or give more information about the artist's apprenticeship.\par
We have partnered with tribal organization here in Yallane called the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project. They have a three-year grant where they are teaching art apprenticeships, three different art apprenticeships a year. And our partnership with them is we give those apprentices a place to display the work.\par
So, they actually become Artisans Co-op members, as well as the mentors teaching. These classes are kind of utilized from the art artists database that we have here within the organization. And so, it's a pretty good partnership.\par
So far, we are the second apprenticeship. And we've seen some growth happening with that partnership." [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L14]\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
FOUNDING AND TIMELINE\par
\par
\par
Founding and Timeline shows structured variation across cooperatives. In what year was the cooperative formally established? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2017, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2014.\par
How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 36, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 120.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), In what year was the cooperative formally established? = 2017; How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 36.\par
"Cheryl 04:42 Our Cooperative was formed in 2017 the E' Numu Allottee Association was formed in 2014" [allottees.txt L25]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), In what year was the cooperative formally established? = 2014; How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 120.\par
"PS: How long have you so you've been with a cooperative since the beginning? When did it start? DM: We were formally registered as a fishery as a cooperative and under British Columbia Law in 2014.\par
But I started, we started our team started working on this around 2004. So, it took us ten years of best practices, tables and workshops, and thinking about what we needed before we got to the point where we created a cooperative." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L13]\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP\par
\par
\par
Governance and Leadership shows structured variation across cooperatives. Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1.\par
Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals? = 1; Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? = 0.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
EMPLOYMENT AND JOBS\par
\par
\par
Employment and Jobs shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 10, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0.\par
How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 20, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 30.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0; How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities? = 0.\par
"Cheryl 05:07 We do everything by consultants, and I do all this team building. It's a single leader team building process we use." [allottees.txt L31]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 2; How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 2.\par
"PS: How many people are employed? DM: There are only four of us that are employed in the cooperative, and there's out of that only two of us are full time. Okay?\par
And I'm not one of those." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L15]\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 10; How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 20; How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities?\par
= 30. "TH 03:52 We have about 10 staff that are directly employed, and then we work with approximately 20 independent advisors of in various regions across the country." [manynations.txt L43]\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0; How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 2.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
FINANCE AND FINANCIAL DISCIPLINE\par
\par
\par
Finance and Financial Discipline shows structured variation across cooperatives. Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 5, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2.\par
How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 12, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 12.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 1; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12.\par
"Cheryl 1:05:05 We do? We do our accounting monthly, because the banks, the bank statements come out sure you know. So the the co op has their their bank, and the nonprofit has its bank.\par
And then, of course, we have credit cards for both entities so that, you know, we can work." [allottees.txt L307]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 5; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 4.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 5; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 2. "KQ: Going on to the next section, which is the general business questions.\par
Number 21. What is the cost current annual revenue? That's okay if you don't know the exact number just give like a ballpark.\par
What would it be? KE: Yeah. So right now, we're under $25,000.\par
But I think pretty sure by the end of the year, we'll, you know, we haven't really had a full year, I don't think because we started in June, or first year and up to December. I know we did pretty good. I know we made close to $30,000.\par
Within just that half a year. No. But then the following year.\par
I think that's when we had some closures. PL: Yeah. January and February.\par
Yeah. KE: I think that's when COVID hit. Right.\par
When did we open? PL: 2019. KE: Yeah.\par
So that first year, we were planning everything because we're really gearing up. And then COVID. And then so that's kind of where ours, we never really had a full year open.\par
Yeah. I think this this year, is probably our first year that we're going to really actually be open throughout the whole year, except. PL: We were doing online sales January, March, April.\par
And wasn't in what month? Did we start coming? We were telling each other.\par
Was it in end of February? KE: In 20? Yeah.\par
CG: June or... KQ: June? CG: Yeah, it was like, June.\par
KE: Last year was primarily online sales because the tribe or the village was still closed. So, this year is kind of more being open regularly, but very low inventory. So yeah, we're in the B category.\par
I really have a really good feeling if we at full capacity with our members' inventory. And not having that to deal with COVID. I'm pretty sure we were easily gotten to see possibly be in the D category but right now, we're at between $25,000 to $50,000.\par
KQ: Would you guys agree? PL: Yes." [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L59]\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
PARTNERSHIPS AND EXTERNAL SUPPORT\par
\par
\par
Partnerships and External Support shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 6, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5.\par
How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 6; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 3; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?\par
= 4. "Cheryl 13:41 Well, to begin with, we were assisted by the Northwest Cooperative Development Center out of Washington. Diane Gassaway, the executive director, has been with us since 2014.\par
She has facilitated. We put together a steering committee, and she and Jim Wabanado from the Indian land tanyra Foundation. They facilitated our meetings.\par
They provided funds for meeting places. You know, they because we didn't have any money, and we were just starting out, but you can't do anything if you don't know where you're going, when you're going to do it, how you're going to get there, and how much it's going to cost, and who's going to do the work. So we're big on planning.\par
(Note: later in the analysis process we may want to eliminate the names mentioned) Pamela 14:38 Did you visit any other cooperatives when you guys started out or connect with any other cooperatives? Cheryl 14:47 No, okay, because I don't think other cooperatives well. Where I live here Madras, there's a co op.\par
It's a farm cooperative, and they charge you a dollar to be in it, and it's geared to all the agricultural around located around the town. So there are some models, you know, that we looked at, but there's not our model is so unique because we're we own our land, and it's all about our land, and a lot of cooperatives. Oh, by the way, our cooperative leases our land.\par
Our cooperative has first priority at leasing our land, and so we've leased our 640 acres to the co op. And through the co-op, we put together agreement to do our test for regenerative grazing (definition?). So, you know, we look at our organizations as tools, because we're not a tribe.\par
Now, you know, we don't have the flexibility of enacting any kind of laws and codes. However, the state of Oregon is the best that we have because we are citizens of Oregon too, and not only tribal members, but landowners, and our land is exempt from state laws other than public law 280 which is law enforcement and the counties. And we've been working with the county.\par
There's a big water wars that are going to be starting up here, and we had to let them know who we are. They diverted our water rights, but they're not doing a good job, and we are first in time, first in right, because we, you know, the land is indigenous to our original people, and the water rights go with the land, not the person. Pamela 17:17 Did your steering committee mold the cooperative around tribal values and our principles?\par
Cheryl 17:24 Well, it's hard to say, because we're Indians. Everything we do is tribal values. And so it's just, you know, there's no identifying it.\par
It just is, right? That's just how it is, yeah, oh, no. We have elders, you know, elders who keep us straight.\par
Pamela 17:53 I like that. Okay, did you adapt standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of your members of your community. Cheryl 18:10 Well, it's in our bylaws, articles and bylaws and our strategic planning business plans that we put together.\par
Our biggest priority was money. We had to get money, so we did a lot of grant writing. One of the advantages, though, is the co-op, we were able to get an equip grant environmental quality, something grant Improvement Grant is equipped by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service, and that has been a real benefit for us to know that our cooperative can seek some funding." [allottees.txt L79-L97]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 6; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 4; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?\par
= 2.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 3; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 1.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 5; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 3; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?\par
= 2.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
PROGRAMS, SERVICES, AND TRAINING\par
\par
\par
Programs, Services, and Training shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 30, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4.\par
How many new programs or services have been added since founding? -> Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? = 30. "PS: Well, it's a beautiful story.\par
I just feel honored that I get to hear this. I mean, it's just so beautiful. So, I'm going to go back because you were one of the founding members.\par
Correct. So how did your cooperative members learn about what a cooperative can do what it can be and what it can do? DM: That's a great question.\par
We began looking, remember we started with the table, the best practices table. I mentioned with a bunch of biologists around, we conducted about thirty workshops over five years before we created this River to Plate vision document. And it was in that that we began to see some clarity.\par
And oh, gosh, I'm sorry, what was the question? PS: How did they learn about what a cooperative is? DM: Oh, yes.\par
PS: And what it can do? DM: So, we began looking at different business models. And of course, the ones at the top of the page were those that we're all familiar with, you know, we'd like to buy all the fish in these communities.\par
And we'll make products, and we'll make a brand, and we'll sell it on we couldn't agree with the brand would be. And you know, the lowest common denominator is where we ended up with, which is the best formula of all. And so, we, we approached some specialists for help.\par
And then City, the Vancity Bank adopted us, we became their pet. And what we learned is that if you're a cooperative bank, you're nothing if you don't have a pet fishery, cooperative fisheries, cooperative fisheries are the origins cooperatives right around the world. So, they adopted us.\par
They provided us with expert financial advice, and business development advice. And they hired a coop developer, to workshop with us to explore how where and if coops might be a fit for our problem, our challenges? And it did, and it was and, and we did and all of that.\par
And so, we ended up with John Restakis, who is the president of the BC Cooperative Association, and one of his best Co-Op developer colleagues, Marty Frost. And the two of them workshopped us for two or three years before we had designed something that we all thought we could live with. And then we move forward that the very first thing we did wasn't a coop, actually, we created a society to, to codify the values principles, the ideas that would, that we felt that the Fraser River chiefs would support.\par
And so, we created initially, the Inland Salmon Producers Association, or ISPA, that still exists today. And through ISPA, we created a self-certification system and a Charter for Responsible Trade that guided the principles, the ethics, the values that were in "River to Plate". And it was from ISPA that we learned from these experimental projects.\par
And we needed to start putting some business tools to work. And that table was far too broad, far too political and far, too big to do business. So, we created RSF to do that.\par
And the question you haven't asked yet, but you will, once we grew out of our clothes in the rivers of British Columbia, we formed a program and are working towards recreating a new identity for our cooperative called Authentic Indigenous Seafood. And if you Google us, you'll find our transition is live right now. Google Authentic Indigenous Seafood." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L33]\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many new programs or services have been added since founding? = 1.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? = 4.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
INNOVATION AND OFFERING DEVELOPMENT\par
\par
\par
Innovation and Offering Development shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4. Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 4; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 4; Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere?\par
= 0.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 4; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 6.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 3; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 3.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 3; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 4.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
OPERATIONS AND SUPPLY CHAIN\par
\par
\par
Operations and Supply Chain shows structured variation across cooperatives. Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 0.\par
Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly from the local area? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? = 0; Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0; Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs?\par
= 1.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? = 1; Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 1; Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs?\par
= 1; Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly from the local area? = 1; Are the co-op's outputs purchased mainly within the local community? = 0.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
MARKETS AND SALES CHANNELS\par
\par
\par
Markets and Sales Channels shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1. What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 2; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 1; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?\par
= 1.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 2; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 2; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?\par
= 5. "PS: What strategies did or did you use or use to raise capital? DM: Oh, yes, we broke our business plan up, our business model up, into a variety of things.\par
So, we mentioned we provide cost-plus services. And there's the first business line item is just basic logistics. So even if a community doesn't use the cooperative for anything else, we can, we can handle all the logistics, from their landing site to get them to where they want to go at cost plus 10%.\par
So, we'll handle the trucking the ice, the totes, we will provide them the skiffs, the tie handlers, you know, we'd handle all that heavy equipment logistics to get their fishery ready for them to do whatever they want with. So that's the first line item. The second is the engineering of products and the labels and the packaging and, and the processing and managing the inventory until it gets to on-site.\par
And so those production logistics has also cost us 10%. And some of our members don't even draw against their cash accounts. Because as soon as they do their tribes take all their profits.\par
And so, what they want to do is keep their money cycling in the coop to continuously build their nest egg. So, they take the profits, and they use it to value-add the next years of harvest. Okay, and so they've got growing inventories and so they've got growing value in their nest egg.\par
They keep building more and more equity. Very interesting. So, then the third line item mentioned consulting.\par
So, we're hired to build business plans and business models for fishing enterprises or specific fisheries that sometimes to solve a problem sometimes to access grants and contributions. PS: And then you have done grants Have you got? Did you get a loan from a financial institution or a loan from like your members?\par
DM: Yes, we have three kinds of loans. We've got a running line of credit for $150,000, which is about three times too small, we're looking to increase that to a half a million to deal with our current needs. We also took advantage of a COVID grant loan, a business loan, which was 50% non-repayable.\par
So, that's a grant. So, we took that and helped to develop one of our production lines, we've developed a new line of shelf stable candied salmon, it's really good. And thirdly, we do a lot of our operational production.\par
So, we do, we do products through the coops, we invest as a coop in, in products like turkeys and our candied salmon, for example, they're still traceable to the community, they just don't have the community logo or the label brand on the package. But there, there's a QR code, that when you scan, it tells you which communities with fisheries and links up to their profiles in that way. So, it's a controversial brand.\par
In my perspective, I'm the one that creates the controversy, I would prefer that everything is branded to the community of origin. But when we've got big ticket items, like our candied salmon, it made more sense to create a single generic package. And, and do large scale production.\par
So, we're, our business is now shifting towards commodity markets for our branded value-added products, as opposed to the whole fish fresh out of the fishery. So, we're developing accounts with Cisco and Gordon Food Services and so forth. So, selling by the pallet load, okay, as opposed to retail.\par
So, we do that by using the cash flow of the cooperative. So, it's a loan from our members that we don't pay for. And that'll probably change as we grow up a bit here.\par
And if we've got standing cash and the accounts from our members, I think, you know, there's a call growing for us to pay interest on those cash accounts. And also, for those that are going into debt to process their production from the year, we're going to start charging them interest. Because, you know, so far, it's like I said, we're still feeling you know, 10 years old here, and we're still in pilot phase are still learning a lot, right?\par
Yes. So, I think we're going to start paying and, and receiving interest on our financial arrangements." [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L70]\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 1.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 3; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 1; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?\par
= 1.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
TECHNOLOGY AND DIGITIZATION\par
\par
\par
Technology and Digitization shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 2.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 4.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 2.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 3.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
CULTURE AND HERITAGE\par
\par
\par
Culture and Heritage shows structured variation across cooperatives. In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 3, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 3; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 4; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 2; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 2.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 3; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
GEOGRAPHY AND PARTICIPATION\par
\par
\par
Geography and Participation shows structured variation across cooperatives. Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0.\par
What is the scope of the production footprint? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), What is the scope of the production footprint? = 1.\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 1.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 1.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 0.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
RISK, RELATIONS, AND ADAPTATION\par
\par
\par
Risk, Relations, and Adaptation shows structured variation across cooperatives. How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 5, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5.\par
How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1. Are there significant government-related issues affecting business?\par
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2.\par
\par
For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5; Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1; How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place?\par
= 3; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 3. "Cheryl 14:47 No, okay, because I don't think other cooperatives well.\par
Where I live here Madras, there's a co op. It's a farm cooperative, and they charge you a dollar to be in it, and it's geared to all the agricultural around located around the town. So there are some models, you know, that we looked at, but there's not our model is so unique because we're we own our land, and it's all about our land, and a lot of cooperatives.\par
Oh, by the way, our cooperative leases our land. Our cooperative has first priority at leasing our land, and so we've leased our 640 acres to the co op. And through the co-op, we put together agreement to do our test for regenerative grazing (definition?).\par
So, you know, we look at our organizations as tools, because we're not a tribe. Now, you know, we don't have the flexibility of enacting any kind of laws and codes. However, the state of Oregon is the best that we have because we are citizens of Oregon too, and not only tribal members, but landowners, and our land is exempt from state laws other than public law 280 which is law enforcement and the counties.\par
And we've been working with the county. There's a big water wars that are going to be starting up here, and we had to let them know who we are. They diverted our water rights, but they're not doing a good job, and we are first in time, first in right, because we, you know, the land is indigenous to our original people, and the water rights go with the land, not the person.\par
Pamela 17:17 Did your steering committee mold the cooperative around tribal values and our principles? Cheryl 17:24 Well, it's hard to say, because we're Indians. Everything we do is tribal values.\par
And so it's just, you know, there's no identifying it. It just is, right? That's just how it is, yeah, oh, no.\par
We have elders, you know, elders who keep us straight. Pamela 17:53 I like that. Okay, did you adapt standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of your members of your community.\par
Cheryl 18:10 Well, it's in our bylaws, articles and bylaws and our strategic planning business plans that we put together. Our biggest priority was money. We had to get money, so we did a lot of grant writing.\par
One of the advantages, though, is the co-op, we were able to get an equip grant environmental quality, something grant Improvement Grant is equipped by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service, and that has been a real benefit for us to know that our cooperative can seek some funding. Pamela 19:10 So how are community assets identified and used to form the cooperative? Cheryl 19:17 Well, depends.\par
If you're talking about asset building, we didn't do that. However, you know, an example of asset building is like a car on a reservation is the highest priority because it's a rural community. However, a car downtown Portland is not a priority because you have transportation there, and our allotments are very rural, as you can see, and so in our planning process, it was the first phase was focused on agriculture.\par
However, some of our allottees want to live on their land, so we'll be looking at other ways to get buildings and other things on our allotments. Actually, you might say we're building a town. We're building a little town now here.\par
And some say we're building our own tribe because, you know, everything we're doing is we're not under the jurisdiction of the tribe other than our tribal affiliation. Pamela 20:41 Yeah, so it's really your you're exercising self-determination and sovereignty. Cheryl 20:50 Well, our, the superintendent at the Bureau of Indian Affairs says we're acting like a self-governance tribe.\par
And I said exactly. I said we are self-governing ourselves. We don't want you bothering us.\par
Pamela 21:11 So I just want to back up to something that you had said about do you have the same issues? Is your allotment land? Because, like when you live, you know, within the traditional territories of your nation, when you have allotment land, it has no value to a bank because they can't repossess it.\par
Is that the same thing with federal allotment land? I'm just asking for my own curiosity, Cheryl 21:37 yeah, well, we can mortgage our land, okay? And then the Bureau of Indian Affairs, I forgot what department they do, loan guarantees.\par
Okay? We can go to a bank, and then naturally, you know, they're going to deny you, yes. And so then when they find out it's going to be 90 95% guaranteed, then they have a different attitude, yeah, although we we don't want to mortgage our land at all.\par
We don't. We're trying to work without getting any loans until, until we have to. Okay, Pamela 22:15 so right now, like the what you're talking about, and of course, some of those things are, you know, they're in the planning stages.\par
But this question is, how did products or services offered by the cooperative reach the market previously? And it kind of sounds like it wasn't there previously. No, it Cheryl 22:35 wasn't.\par
However, we are developing our website to do e commerce, okay? And we haven't. We haven't released it live yet.\par
We're still working on it, okay? And it's how do I want to say this do in our website, through our Co Op, people will have the opportunity to sell their products. For example, you know, we might give an acre to maybe some kids and let them grow their vegetables, and they can market it through the co op.\par
Okay, that's, you know, one, one way of looking at Pamela 23:23 it, oh, I'm sorry, go ahead. Cheryl 23:25 Well, there's, there's, there's, there's so much opportunities and the complexity of having an A Co Op, you know, it isn't as easy as just putting together your articles and your bylaws, because you're dealing with low income people in rural communities, and part of the co op is you're required to invest in your co op.\par
And the other issue is the financial stability, you know? Well, I'm, I previously was a, I'm considered a forensic account, so I'm spending a lot of time setting up our chart of accounts and projecting with our CPA how we're going to account for products. And you know, it gets real interesting when you get into the cost of goods sold, the the inventories, the equities, the all of that stuff is it's overwhelming to individual persons.\par
So you got to make sure that you have the right person to do this for you in your co op. And so far we, you know, we, we do everything by consultants, but eventually we will be having to hire people to to do, you know, once, once we start. Really going.\par
But for now, we can manage it through the board. Manages it through, through our single leader, project manager, me, Pamela 25:13 you just keep them all in line. I have a I just want to back up to that last question, because really what you had previously, if I'm correct, what I heard you say is that your allotment land was under the control of BIA.\par
Was handling all your land leases for you, and it was cattle, and they literally overgrazed your allotment land. Am I correct? Cheryl 25:37 Yeah, that's lack of lease compliance, okay, all right, mismanagement of trust assets is what it's called, Pamela 25:45 okay, that's a, yeah, they're kind of famous for that, okay?\par
And then seeing, I don't know if this question even applies, because, you know, the question above was like, How did products and services before, you know, how did they reach the market? And there really wasn't a market before, except for leasing, for cattle grazing and, Cheryl 26:15 oh, there are, there are some markets for our products. For example, the casinos, if we're going to grow agricultural products, you know.\par
So you know, we have looked at trying to buy Indian and have our products be marketed as native made. Pamela 26:41 So previously, kind of the it sounds like the value was set by what the BIA was able to obtain for a lease, correct for the land, and you're changing that value proposition now. Cheryl 26:56 Oh, yeah, we, for the first time, see the bureau when they sign a lease, that's a federal undertaking, and when it's a federal undertaking, all these laws the federal government is comply, is required to apply for, like NEPA, ARPA, the archeological Protection Act, all of these laws kick into place.\par
Well, they've never complied with these laws, and what really stood out was when USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service issued the grant to our co op. Well, that's another federal undertaking, and they did the archeological surveys and the environmental reviews and all of that stuff on our allotments and we did soil sampling we you know, it was just amazing to see what a government agency can do In exercising their trust responsibility to us our land, not only the BIA is not, you know, the all the federal government is responsible for, the trust responsibility to land in Indian country, so to speak.\par
Pamela 28:18 Okay, now I'm going to go into kind of like values and community. Do you have a sense of how you and your culture influence the cooperative? Cheryl 28:35 Again, we're Indians.\par
Our Co Op is designed. It's, it's, it's for us. And it's hard for me to break it down and explain it to you, if you, if you find a better way, let me know.\par
Pamela 28:52 Well, I understand what you're talking about, because it really, it's really hard when you tell a non native audience about what drives what we're doing and why we do it, and how and even the way that we listen to the needs of our community, because we really are the most informed, legitimate resource for handling our own problems and having solutions to them, and I understand what you're talking about, because I, I the other day, I was working on a project, and they were asking about, well, why are you doing this?\par
And and it's like, okay, we've been asking for this for 30 years, and nobody has listened. So we're taking we are taking hold of it, and this is how it's going to be done. Because this is because they're going, Well, did your community inform this decision?\par
And it's like, holy we've been screaming it from the towers. You know for 30 years that these are things that. We need in order to function properly and do the best service that we can for our communities, and they still don't get it.\par
So I understand what you're talking about, and I and I love that what you had said earlier about, oh my gosh. I just, I just loved it. What you said about we're not your, we're not your, Cheryl 30:27 we're not your, yeah, we're not your Indian anymore.\par
Yeah, Pamela 30:33 okay, well, I think this is, that's a great answer. So we're going to just move forward. Are there any, have there been or are there any issues between the co op and the local community?\par
Cheryl 30:45 Oh, yeah, there the other you know, we're only four allotments. There are like 65 allotments located around us, and they're all at 160 acres each, and they're all owned by other individual allottees. And when we first started out with the Numa lat Association, there was a lot of interest, and we were really, you know, happy, thinking we were going to do some great things, except, you know, how tribal members are tribal politics got into it, and so we decided just to narrow it and keep it with our family.\par
And if we develop these models and other allottees want to use them with their families and whatever, great. But so that's why we decided to to narrow our focus. That way we won't set ourselves up to fail.\par
Okay, Pamela 31:50 are Have you received any Have there been any issues with the greater community beyond your allottees, the native allottees? Um, I Well, Cheryl 32:06 I just sort of think that the greater issue is the water rights issue that the county and the state is doing. We monitor it, but if we have to, we'll file the claim and put a stop to to that, and they know it, but we're just monitoring it right now.\par
You know, the minute that they tell us we can't do our wells, we can't do this, that we don't have water rights, they're going to find out who has the water rights, because we're first in time, first and right, okay? And we've, we've also put together a study on the allottee water rights that is posted with the University of Colorado in the natural resource and Environmental Law Review. It's, there's a volume there that has to do with our allotments.\par
Pamela 33:13 Can I'm going to ask you another cultural question. Hold on, girlie. Okay, I'm ready some indigenous communities use cooperatives to reinforce traditional systems and values of Native nations and First Peoples.\par
Is that the case here? Well, Cheryl 33:38 we're using both of our organizations, the nonprofit, you know, to get money to implement like our traditional foods. You know, everybody knows that Native people, the health issues are just awful, and it's because of the bad foods people are eating.\par
So we want to bring back our traditional foods. Hopefully we will through our organic seed farm, you know, reproduce, I think it's called propagate, or something, seeds, so that maybe we can send send them out to other tribes or individuals who want to plant, you know, restore the traditional foods Pamela 34:29 so well, that's that you guys are doing really important work. I'm really excited about your cooperative.\par
This, this section kind of goes into ongoing operations, and part of it, this isn't going to this isn't going to apply to you, because you're not on tribal land, even though you are on Indian land, you know what I mean. But how do you keep the community? Do you.\par
Do you work with your tribal leadership even though it's off, you know, it's off tribal land. Are they engaged with you somehow, or do you keep them in communication about what you're doing? Are you just out there doing your thing?\par
Cheryl 35:13 Oh, well, we market ourselves through, like the Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians. They're, you know, consortium of, I think, 59 tribes. Some of our allottees are members of the burns Paiute Tribe in Oregon.\par
And as you can see, you know the picture there, you'll see that fence. Well, on your left side, I believe the good fence. Well, there is no good fence in this picture, but the fence, the fence over that side, okay, is owned by the burns Paiute Tribe.\par
They have a they have a statute in place that says, if a individual Indian passes, individual landowner that passes with no heirs that let that allotment goes to the tribe as part of their reservation. Oh, and so our allotment 18 is right next to it, so we could say we're on or near an Indian reservation, you can, yeah, no, we can, but the tribe is not interested in doing anything with their allotment.\par
You know, we, we would like to involve them, but they're not interested. So we, we're, we're going forth, Pamela 36:39 okay? And then the the next question is, can you share examples of how the community collaborates with your cooperative?\par
Cheryl 36:49 Well, they lease our allotments the community, if you're talking about ranchers, some of the some of the allottees were purchased by non Indians and became fee land. But see, our land is like 20 miles away from the town of burns. There's nothing there, yeah, so it's you know, the definition of community is really broad, okay, you know, so we're going to have all types of communities, yeah.\par
Pamela 37:39 Are, are the other allottees. You know, when you talked about the other 64 allotments, are they engaged with you on any level? Are they still kind of doing their own thing and don't want to be Cheryl 37:52 they're just, they're just leasing their land, letting the bureau lease their land.\par
Okay, alright, we're the only ones who are doing our own leasing, yeah, and and paying everything, managing our own land. Pamela 38:08 So if we're looking now, we're looking to the future, what does your board need now to continue to grow, prosper and sustain the cooperative? Cheryl 38:21 Well, it's they need 10 of me.\par
They need they need expertise. One of the two of the our board members are young men. And we're hoping, you know, we're hoping that you know, all of this is for our future generations, because my my mother never left, you know, all when we got the land, the Bureau was leasing it, and it was really bad shape.\par
So we don't want to leave that for our future generations. And so we are training, hopefully, training our young people to be managers. We're hoping we have scholarships that we're hoping to encourage people to or the youth to take up degrees in agriculture.\par
I mean, it's not just being a farmer or rancher. You can be a lawyer, you can be all kinds of things. Accountants.\par
We badly need accountants. So those are the kind of things that the board needs to make sure that they are are aware of, and sometimes which we struggle with, because we want to do everything by the, you know, from the landowners, but we might have to bring in new some board members, maybe like a banker or an attorney or. Somebody, somebody to help.\par
Because a lot of our board members, I think their education level is not that high. One board member has a he has his business degree, his Bachelor's in business degree, I believe Pamela 40:25 so. Is this the same or different set of needs for the cooperative membership in general?\par
Are all your landowners? Are they all on the board of directors? Or is it just a few of the 17 people, how do you Well, Cheryl 40:45 it's it's not easy to become a member of our Co Op, because we, our bylaws state that we pay a membership of $50 annually?\par
Well, that's not happening. And so collections in Indian Country is pretty bad. And so what?\par
I guess, you know, I'm all about the money. I mean, you have to have money to do anything, and it's my hope that when I leave, I'm supposed to be retired. Of course, I'm always going to be a landowner.\par
So as long as I'm a landowner, I'm going to be involved, but, but if they, if I leave, or we split up, then you know who's to know where everything's going to go. So it's really important for all of us to stick together, okay? And we know that, and we all do stick together.\par
Pamela 42:09 If this cooperative has an effect you hope for in the long run, what would it look like like if you close your eyes? What would it look like if everything was working the way that you've envisioned it. What would be happening on those four allotments?\par
Cheryl 42:25 Oh, we would have our projects under our co op. One is we're going to farm the sun through solar and we're going to manage our water, our water rights, and, you know, to conserve water, we're going to restore the land by putting back the Traditional Foods or plants and wildlife, fish and wildlife. Um, uh, and hopefully our people will be living there.\par
Pamela 43:22 Okay, if you were thinking about because you are an elder, so it's kind of and you started this project as probably pretty close to being an elder too. What advice would you give to yourself, kind of at the start of this cooperative journey looking back. What?\par
What advice would you give yourself? Cheryl 43:48 Well, you know, it's really hard. That's a really tough question, because I never work alone.\par
You know, I work I work through teams. I work. I work with all the allottees to make sure that they are informed, that they understand what is happening.\par
They I call the board meetings so that the board can make decisions on things that we have to do. They issue resolutions to give me guidance. The I guess the best advice I could say, is to teach my skills to the youth.\par
You know, once I'm gone, it's you know that institutional wisdom goes, and that institutional wisdom is so important from our elders and even our language, we want to restore our language, because you can't really have your culture if you don't know your language. Yeah. And I don't know my language.\par
Pamela 45:05 I don't either, but I keep trying me too. I just keep trying. I have a class that I take from Cherokee Nation.\par
It's two times a week, and they do it online. I love it, and I have the best instructor. His name is Mister fields, and he's probably, he might be around 80, and, oh, he's the best teacher in the world.\par
I just love him, because he just adds so much more than just what's in the lesson plan, you know. So I always leave with I'm always happy after I get done. It just kind of feeds my it's like Chicken Soup for my soul being able to do that.\par
So I've had, you know, classes at my house. I've, I've stayed, but a friend of mine, I we were talking about that, and I said, for some reason, I just can't retain it. It's little grandma and grandpa always spoke the language in the house, but they spoke Indian to me.\par
I mean, they spoke English to me, and maybe thinking that they want me to do better, you know, than they did, because they English was their second language. And then my mom and dad met in boarding school, and my mom, you know, would talk about how they were marched to school, and, I mean, to classes. And you notice things like she would embroider our pillowcases and iron our sheets, and that's kind of a sign that she was being trained to be a maid for somebody I don't know, but I guess a lot of that and our my grand parents always spoke Indian to my mom and my aunts, but they'd answer back in English, and they all went to boarding school.\par
Yeah. So it could be part of that, yeah, still impacting us today. Oh, Cheryl 47:21 I believe it is.\par
I really do. And I have a problem, like, I'm self conscious when I talk me too, because it's like, oh my, you know, like, I'll, I'll catch myself when I just get a solo bowl, it doesn't roll off my tongue the right way. And, you know, I still remember I did my whole answering machine in the language, and my grandma called, and she goes, Why are you telling people to hate you?\par
Because I went, Oh, see, oh, to hate you. Well, it's to hit you, and I didn't pronounce it correctly. And she Why are you saying that?\par
Why are you telling people to hate you, you know, like, hello, hate you, you know. And I I thought, Oh, man. And then I'd be talking, I'd be talk, trying to talk to my relatives in the language, and they'd be just looking at me like they'd say, keep practicing.\par
Yeah, we have self conscious and I just feel like I think that's what holds a lot of us back. I think when we're older, because we don't want to make mistakes, where a child will just jump right in and they don't care. Okay, well, they never say things right when they're little.\par
Oh, yeah, they pick it up really fast. Yeah, we have fluent Paiute language speakers in our our group and even on our board. And you know, they do speak the language in board meetings, but they intimidate me, because I just don't have that the way they talk.\par
I just don't have it so. But you know the the Paiute language. So there are so many dialects.\par
You know, the in like the burns people call themselves, what did to come means to eat and water is seed. So they're seed eaters. And my grandfather was Gita Tika, and Gita is Groundhog, so they're groundhog eaters.\par
And some of our cousins are from Pyramid Lake, and their queen we took means they're fish eaters, you know, and that's how the Paiute people of the Northwest basins used to identify themselves, not by being Paiute, but by by what they ate in their traditions and all of that stuff. Pamela 49:52 Oh, that's interesting. Oh, yeah, I have some I've got some more questions.\par
If you're willing to keep rolling with me, I'm willing. A few are you? Oh, yeah, you're such a good sport.\par
Okay, these are, these questions are about, it's kind of general business, questions about the co op. So the co op is located in what's the community called. Is there a name for it?\par
Cheryl 50:21 We have a language. I mean, we have an address. If you notice the roads there, see there's one, one access road coming into the allotment 18.\par
And I did, I did. I got some money to do from rural business development grant to do an access road. And so our neighbor, who is off the grid, they're non Indians that are surrounding us that own fee land.\par
They put in part of a road, and some of the road is owned by the state. And so one of them has a mailbox. So they, we know they have an address, but we, we use our vice president's address.\par
It's one Paiute Street, and it's located on the burns Paiute reservation. So and then we have our mailing address, which is in Madras. So we're a virtual organization.\par
You know, the co op is a virtual organization that manages our land. Okay, I'm really big on virtual organizations. Well, it seems to be the trend, especially in our rural communities, that's how we have to function, because you can't.\par
There's just so many challenges and barriers that we need that virtual, that kind of virtual identity. And there, there is, sometimes there isn't even the infrastructure in some of our communities to have like a bricks and mortar presence. So we're, we're operating from our kitchen tables, you know, in our communities.\par
Well, if you remember, our ancestors were nomadic people, yeah, you know, and they didn't, you know, they didn't have a house and a grocery store and all of that, it was there, yeah, Pamela 52:25 and no mailboxes, right? Cheryl 52:27 But we're what we want to do is we want to put a office there for our our association and our Co Op, okay? Pamela 52:38 And, Cheryl 52:42 and we're looking at raising funds to put that building there.\par
And also we want to put a, I don't know, a sweat house, something for our ceremonies. So we can, you know, we we haven't really blessed, blessed our land like we should, but we want to, and we're going to, okay, well, Pamela 53:03 that's good. Now you have 17 members right now, correct?\par
Yes, okay, and you're, you're planning on growing it just 22 Cheryl 53:14 Yes. Well, when we got our, when we got the equip grant, the USDA Natural Resource Conservation services wrote us a letter about our farm operating plan, which is great. We have a farm operating plan, and in that farm operating plan, there were actually a 16 members of the Co Op, because those members were all members of good standing, and they filled out the forms that was required for the the USDA.\par
And so then they, they would take, you know, 116 and have a percentage like point. This is 625, so if we do a distribution, a patronage distribution, to our members, we use that distribution, percentages and that and that is taxable income. Anything under a co op is taxable, yeah, and then, but the leasing that the co op does when they lease our land is what you call trust funds, and that money goes out to the individual allottees, and it's distributed by the their percentage.\par
Or all of us have a under what is called an undivided interest percentage, and the title status report in the BIA is how that money is distributed, and that's called trust funds. And so you see, that's why I'm saying we're very unique. So you probably won't find anybody like our organizational structure is set up, and it's very complex.\par
That's why we're still hammering out our bylaws. We're gonna amend them again, but when we amend our bylaws, we have to have all the members approve it. Where it was easy when we first formed, because we just had the board, but now we have members, and that gets very complicated.\par
Okay, do Pamela 55:31 you have a Do you currently have an annual revenue? You don't have to answer any question you don't want to answer, oh, can just saying, Cheryl 55:41 well, the annual revenue to the lattes comes from our co op because we have a 10 year lease and the Co Op, the co op annually pays, pays that money to the landowners, okay, But the co op through our regenerative grazing projects. We charge the the lessee, we charge them to put their cattle there.\par
For example, 100 last year, it was 175 head of cattle. And we, they, they, we did an agreement because our attorney advised us just to do an agreement under the lease for the co op. Pamela 56:26 And Cheryl 56:30 so they the agreement stated that the cattle would say two to five days under each paddock.\par
We divided them into 40 acre paddocks, and then retook, rotated them around the land, and that's the best way to regenerate your land. And then last year, this year, we put 187 cattle on however, because of the drought and the extreme heat wave that we experienced the foliage there wasn't as great, so the lessee didn't stay there as long, but we generated, let's see, last year, it was $4,000 for 20 days, Okay?\par
And if you compare that to when, what the lease, the BIA leased our land for, for a five year lease at like maybe $300 a year, and we pulled it in and less than a month. So you know it's that Co Op is a real nice tool. We look at our nonprofit and Co Op as nice tools.\par
Pamela 57:50 So would you say that you're right now, your current annual revenue? Would it be under 25,000 a year? Would it be 25 to 5050?\par
To Well, Cheryl 58:03 when we apply for grants, you know they're not used as matching. There's usually no matching funds, but you have to demonstrate leverage, and right now, our leverage is at $235,000 so the budget for our nonprofit is $235,000 but that includes the equip grant. That's 140 it includes the Rural Business Development Grant, it includes the Native American agricultural fund grants, and then it also includes our we would have annual membership fees, so we're looking at building the budget.\par
However, the nonprofit does not have the three year finance that's required, you know, and so our, I mean, the the co op doesn't have it. The nonprofit serves as a fiscal agent for our co op. Okay?\par
Pamela 59:12 So really, the your revenue right now is really setting with the nonprofit to manage and distribute, getting, getting those opportunities for the Cheryl 59:21 Yeah, other than the membership fees and the revenue generated under the lease in the co op. Pamela 59:29 So how, how does the cooperative distribute profits or funds to the members, the Cheryl 59:36 patronage for I explained that earlier, is we use the percentage that was put together in our farm operating plan by USDA to distribute revenue, or patronage revenue, to our patrons.\par
However, the board. Does control that the board can decide that maybe we, you know, we shouldn't be making the distribution Okay, and it just depends, because we don't want to pay taxes. Pamela 1:00:18 So your so your patronage amount, if I heard you correctly before, if I remember correctly, it's 16.25 is that?\par
What you said? Cheryl 1:00:27 The percentage is 6.256250 Pamela 1:00:32 boy, you don't want me working in your books. Your members would they'd go, we love that woman.\par
Bring her back. Give her a raise, Cheryl 1:00:43 yeah, but if we increase it, that percentage goes down. Okay.\par
Pamela 1:00:48 So what strategies, strategies did you or do you use to raise the raise capital? So it sounds like has it been mostly grant funds and some member funds, yeah, Cheryl 1:01:02 at this time, yes, but we have been approached by many investors, and for example, you know, we have a business plan for hemp and projections, and we've had been approached for people who wanted To invest in growing hemp on our property, even marijuana.\par
But, you know, we thought about it, and hemp is even in our language, we ha, we ha, ho and but we thought about it and with the headaches that come with it, and it wasn't a stable I mean, there was a lot of money there, but there was no infrastructure or stability in raising the hemp. And besides, we're our trust land. We're federal, so we have to comply with federal laws, and until the farm bill came out and made it legal for us to grow hemp.\par
Yeah, we couldn't grow hemp, yeah, but, you know, we've been approached to put a warehouse on there to make light bulbs and but you know, there's a lot of things you have to think about, your waste disposal, you know, your energy resources, staff, hiring staff, all of that stuff. And since you're remote, how where are they going to live? They're going to try travel 20 miles every day to come work, you know?\par
So those are things we're thinking about, maybe putting a farm labor bunk house or something out there for seasonal workers. That's a Pamela 1:02:46 great idea. Well, now do you do you have a budget?\par
Um, Cheryl 1:02:55 well, anytime we do grants or anything, the numu a lot to Association takes 15% and so if that's actually for overhead and stuff, but basically the direct costs, you know, that money that just goes out under the grants, okay, I'd like to have, uh, we're building our budget slowly, okay, but not right now, maybe I need to hire a executive director who you know can really do a lot of fundraising and all of that, or you can pay organizations you know to fundraise for you.\par
But yeah, I just don't want to let anybody into our our stuff yet. Pamela 1:03:45 No, that's probably wise, and and then you still control your narrative. That's really important.\par
A lot of times when you hire somebody from the outside, they add things to your narrative that really kind of skew it, and it can actually cause more problems, I think, in the long run. So if so, if you have a budget for your grants, but you don't have a budget really established for the cooperative yet, it's more for the grants. I know that's kind of a tough question, because when you're working in those two worlds, you really do have a budget for the Co Op, because the grants are driving, you know, they're bringing the funding in.\par
So, you know, if you're thinking about it, I'm going to ask the question this way, and they're listening to me. So if I'm, if I'm wrong, I'll hear about it later, they'll gang up on me. And if they do, I'm calling you Cheryl, I'm going to say they're being mean to me.\par
No, the so if you right now the budgets that you do have established for all the grant money that you have in, how often are you reviewing it? How. Often.\par
Are you looking at it? Is it weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually? Cheryl 1:05:05 We do?\par
We do our accounting monthly, because the banks, the bank statements come out sure you know. So the the co op has their their bank, and the nonprofit has its bank. And then, of course, we have credit cards for both entities so that, you know, we can work.\par
Pamela 1:05:28 Some of these questions are a little bit they're kind of, they're they're duplicate of the earlier questions, but it's asking about who provided the technical assistance. So you did have, you did use a co op developer, and that was Northwest cooperative services. Is that right Cheryl 1:05:51 north?\par
Yeah, Northwest cooperative Pamela 1:05:54 development center, okay, and that's Diane. Cheryl 1:05:58 She started us, Pamela 1:06:00 okay, and she's still working with you, right? Oh yeah, yeah, she's Diane's really a talented woman.\par
Oh yes, she is. Cheryl 1:06:11 And so is Jim wabadatti from the Indian lantern air foundation. Pamela 1:06:15 I don't know him.\par
Oh, I'm going to have to, because they're, they're not too far for me. They're just maybe 20 minutes from where I live, so I should, yeah, I live in Saint Paul, so I should get to know them. Oh, and and then Indian land tenure, I want to put that in Cheryl 1:06:32 there.\par
And then also the inter tribal Agricultural Council, yup, intertribal, AG, see, we don't work alone. We have partners, we have friends. We never work alone.\par
Pamela 1:06:44 No, it's that's so important. Cheryl 1:06:46 And we have you Pamela. Pamela 1:06:51 And then you did, you did do a feasibility study, right?\par
And a business, oh, yeah, okay. And then we have our Cheryl 1:06:59 strategic plan Pamela 1:07:00 also and strategic. Did you, this is the question, did you adapt the standard that the kind of the standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of your communities, or did you just straight across the board, adopt the cooperative kind of the standard cooperative development plan?\par
Cheryl 1:07:21 No, everything was done through, you know, the steering committee or the board, our strategic planning process. And, you know, we, we brainstormed about a lot of things. However, the organic seed farm seemed to be the best and and that's why we put the cooperative together.\par
But that doesn't mean you can't have projects under it. Yep, exactly. We don't want to have 20 million co ops.\par
We just want to have one that is geared specifically towards our mission. Okay? Pamela 1:08:06 Okay, I got another question.\par
Did you work with anyone else in doing these things? Or did you, you know you mentioned who your partners were up above, or did you only do this work among your members? Or was it this question is kind of Cheryl 1:08:23 it's, well, let me give you an example, the rural Okay, the Rural Business Development Grant.\par
When you apply, you apply to get technical assistance, which means you hire professional consultants to do the work for you, and I'm the person who does the team building. I pick, I pick our team that's going to do what we need. For example, when we did the strategic planning, you know, I had, I had a legal person, I had a economist, I had a engineering firm, I had, and then, in addition to our partners, And then with me, and then, of course, what comes with me is my husband.\par
He is, he's got an MBA with the forestry degree, degree. So he is does all our natural resource stuff for us, pro bono. And so we're very fortunate to have, you know, those kind of partners pulling in the right consultants.\par
You can't just hire any consultant. And once I got them, I kept them. I keep them because it's really hard to train them about us.\par
Yes. And you know, for example, the Northwest cooperative development center paid for an attorney for us to do our bylaws. I finally told Diane.\par
I said, I'm tired of training your attorney. You're paying him for money for me to train him. Stop.\par
So we quit. So she pulled him back, and then I pulled the attorney and that I knew Who knew us and who understood everything, and she's just fabulous. Pamela 1:10:35 Well, that's a really having the right people at the table.\par
Yes, it's kind of like the secret sauce. And when you can get those people all working together and there's a high level of trust, it's like there's no you can't do that's a really valuable point. Do I have another question, do all your members have to be?\par
Do all of your members have to be tribal members Cheryl 1:11:11 in the co op? It says you have, I mean, in the bylaws for the Co Op, it says you have to demonstrate that you're a descendant of the former malheur Indian Reservation, okay? Or and, or the snake and Paiute Indians, okay?\par
So they have to demonstrate a tie to us, but, but we help anybody that you know, any allottee that really needs help. For example, we went up to we were invited by the Shoshone bannocks up to Fort Hall Pocatello, Idaho, to tell them about our allotments and what we did, our success stories and all of that stuff. And it was wonderful.\par
We I've thoroughly enjoyed being around the people who, you know, they're, they're, they're so excited about hearing they don't have to listen to the BIA, you know, they don't have to listen to their tribe, even though they're on the res. It's their land. Yeah, and you can do a lot if you want to.\par
There's this awful suppression mindset that comes from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and I seen it a lot with the allottees out here. Is that, oh, the Bureau is going to do that for you, or you can't do that because you don't have the Bureau's permission, and we're just trying. That's where this, not your Indian anymore, came up.\par
Is you know that? You know we're taxpayers, that federal government agency works for us, we don't work for them, and so you know, our new superintendent is wonderful. I love her, and we're working together on a lot of things.\par
And I wish that for everybody, but I know Pamela 1:13:12 it's not that way. No, it's not, it's not. It really, you really fortunate, but you're also the where I feel, where you're really fortunate is that you have the inside on working for the BIA and knowing how that organization operates.\par
And so, you know, I think that that was, that was kind of an important tool for you to have in helping this cooperative, you know, goal and to but there's a shift happening. I see it throughout the country where, whereas native people were saying, No, we're not going to do it that way anymore, we've been doing it your way. Now we're going to do it our way, what we know that works best for us.\par
So I love that again. Some of these questions, I apologize. This is the first time that I've done this part of the survey.\par
So we'll probably have a meeting tomorrow and talk about some of these questions. So What process did you go through to start the cooperative? What did you like?\par
What was the first thing that you did to get to get this going? Oh, well, we had to, you Cheryl 1:14:23 know, our steering committee, okay, we had, we had, we. We had to do is plan our strategy and for economic development.\par
That was what we wanted the cooperative for, because we didn't have, we didn't want 30 of us out there on our land doing different things, so we had to stay focused. And the co op is a way for us to speak with one voice and a way for us to work together without, you know, dealing with the conflicts. And as you know.\par
You know the the forming of groups, you go through the forming and the storming, and a lot of people don't make it through the storming and the performing and the norming, if you know that cycle, if you understand it and mitigate the storming part. And by the way, I used to be a registered mediator, so doesn't mean I could mediate, you know, you I have to create neutral ground. It doesn't mean I could mediate it.\par
But I understand a lot of that and and so every time we see that the storming, because some when a new group member comes or, you know, we change our strategy, it starts all over again. So you got to focus on that storming to make sure that we all stick together. That's how we deal with the storming.\par
We all remind ourselves we stick together and we're family. We're all family, you know. So Pamela 1:16:04 I like, so I when you guys, when you guys brought in Northwest cooperative development and Indian land tenure and inter tribal ag Council, how did you choose to work with them?\par
Like, how did you choose to work with Diane? Cheryl 1:16:22 Well, actually, I got a grant from the socially disadvantaged grant from the Rural Business Development Center USDA. It's the first grant I wrote, wow.\par
And the contract person told me about Diane. And so he set up a meeting, and she was coming to meet with him. So we met here in Madras, and we got to talking, and I, you know, told her what we wanted to do.\par
I had to tell her who we are and what we are. And so we had her come out and even tour the land, and so that she could have a idea of, you know, what, what we were wanting to do. So the first thing we had to do was put our articles together and put our bylaws together.\par
And so she helped us through that by facilitating the group, you know, and bringing all the ideas together and all of that stuff. And once we got that done, and then I just sent them to the state of Oregon. I mean, I know how to set up LLC.\par
It's the same and I knew how to set up the nonprofit. So the co op in Oregon, it's just a little different, but still the same. Pamela 1:17:47 Okay, they have cooperative law in Oregon, don't they?\par
Cheryl 1:17:51 Yeah, yeah, they do. It's really complicated, yeah, and and the IRS, you have to look at that too. It says that a farming, farming cooperative doesn't have to pay taxes, but you have to really understand that the idea is any money that comes in, you distribute it back out, and your patrons pay the taxes.\par
Okay, yeah, wow, taxes. Everybody has to pay taxes, and that's so important for everybody to understand when you're doing business through your co op. Pamela 1:18:28 So how would you describe your experience working with these supportive organizations like Diane, Indian land tenure, inter tribal ag Council, how?\par
How would you, what was your experience like working with them? Cheryl 1:18:45 Oh, I love them all, okay, but I knew them all before, before we even started doing what we were doing, okay? Pamela 1:18:56 Cuz I know Catherine talked about you from, you know, when we had that shared call that one time, and she just, she just kept talking about the regenerative grazing that you were doing and how you were healing the land, and how important that was.\par
Was was Catherine? Was she your, your rep for intertribal AG, Cheryl 1:19:19 well, she is now, but how I met, how I met her, was through my husband. We were at the Affiliated Tribes conference, and I, I was a committee chair, so I had to do this.\par
So I asked my husband, I says, Can you attend this other meeting? It had to do with land. And you attend this other meeting for me.\par
And he goes, Well, how much you going to pay me? So I always had to give him gambling money. You know, most of the time we were at the tribal Casino and Resort.\par
And so anyway, he goes to that meeting and I. He comes back, so impressed about this woman, and he says, You have got to meet this woman. Oh, okay.\par
I said, Well, what's her name? And so he went and got her phone number and name and where she was from, and I called her, and that's how we met. And I told her, you know about who we are.\par
She had never heard of public domain allotments. Yeah, Pamela 1:20:25 well, I know it's like, boy, I thought, I thought I knew everything, and when I that's been quite an education. I mean, learning about public domain allotments.\par
They're all across the United States. I had no idea just and in Alaska, I could see Alaska that being up in Alaska more than down in the US, but I just, I don't know that that was really interesting. So when you guys what brought like, what brought everybody together to form the cooperative and, and I think you've answered that up above, because you, really, you guys wanted to do this.\par
And I don't want to tell you, but it what would the answer be, that you guys came together for economic development? Well, Cheryl 1:21:13 when we got the grant money from the socially disadvantaged group, grants data enabled us to hold our meetings and pay for travel because, like our president, lives in Fort Dushane, you know, he's a tribal member of the Reno Sparks Indian colony, but his wife is a ute, and they live out there on that reservation out there in Utah.\par
Wow. And so then we have our other one. He's a Muckleshoot tribal member, and he's up in Washington.\par
So, you know, so we had we that money was so important for us to fund their travel. Our other board member was that it lives down in San Jose to California. That's down there by LA.\par
Wow. You know so our tribal people, people, our board members, like you say we're like I said, we're a virtual organization, but it's important for us to have the money to fund participation, yeah, and when we started doing that, and then we had Diane come in and buy lunch for everybody, because you don't want them to leave when you're in these meetings. So you gotta feed them.\par
And then the Indian lantern foundation paid for the meeting places. And at one time, Catherine, we met out at Umatilla at their museum where her office was. And so we really, you know, strategize, saved resources, but we got together, and we did really good, until COVID hit.\par
Then it became zoom, yeah, but you can't replace in Indian country, we're huggy people. We're face to face people. This zoom just, it's just doesn't work for us.\par
Half the time they can't work their cellphone half the time their internet doesn't work, or their WiFi, or I just get really frustrated in working with remote rural communities. Yeah, on Zoom, see down." [allottees.txt L85-L397]\par
\par
For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5; Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1; Are there significant community-related issues affecting business?\par
= 1; How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? = 2; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 4.\par
\par
For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 4; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1.\par
\par
For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1.\par
\par
The same metric can signal capacity or constraint depending on design and context. Interviewers should target unknowns and test governance-cadence-capital coherence.\par
\par
\par
PART III: SYNTHESIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS\par
\par
\par
Coherence, not sheer scale, best predicts resilience. Many Nations: continue channel expansion and invest in Indigenous workforce pipelines linked to product innovation. RSF: scale distribution while preserving transparent bidding and story-forward branding; extend national supply collaborations.\par
Allottees: capitalize enabling infrastructure (water, solar, fencing) and codify finance cadence and contingency policies. RTZ: formalize inventory management, scheduling, and partner finance to convert community momentum into reliable market presence.\par
}
