{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\b Co-op Comparative Outcome Report (v0.2.2)\b0\par
\b Chapter 1: Method\b0\par
We coded metrics only when explicitly supported by the transcripts and marked unknowns as -1. Encodings were normalized across co-ops, and evidence notes include transcript citations. This edition expands the comparative narrative for humans, not machines.\par\par
\b Chapter 2: Comparative Narrative\b0\par
Membership and Constituency\par
How many members are currently in good standing? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 17; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 250; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 46. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Founding and Timeline\par
In what year was the cooperative formally established? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2017; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2014. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 36; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 120. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Governance and Leadership\par
Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1. Unstated: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0. Unstated: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Employment and Jobs\par
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 10; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 20; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 30. Unstated: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Finance and Financial Discipline\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 5; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 12; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 12. Unstated: RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Partnerships and External Support\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 6; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Programs, Services, and Training\par
How many new programs or services have been added since founding? Reported values: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 30; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Innovation and Offering Development\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0. Unstated: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Operations and Supply Chain\par
Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 0. Unstated: RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly from the local area? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Are the co-op's outputs purchased mainly within the local community? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 0. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Markets and Sales Channels\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Technology and Digitization\par
How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Culture and Heritage\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 3; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Geography and Participation\par
What is the scope of the production footprint? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1. Unstated: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Risk, Relations, and Adaptation\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 5; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 4; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
Are there significant community-related issues affecting business? Reported values: DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Unstated: Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2. Unstated: Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op). Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? Reported values: Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1. Interpretation: Variation here reflects strategy and constraints; we judge coherence by whether choices advance mission and address stated challenges.\par\par
\b Chapter 3: Key Findings\b0\par
Many Nations shows organizational scale and cadence; RSF shows innovation and market engineering; Allottees shows governance posture and land logic; RTZ shows community energy and partnerships. Each path can be healthy when strategy and execution match.\par
}
