{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\b Co-op Interview Outcome Report (v0.2.1)\b0\par
\b Chapter 1: Method\b0\par
We read each interview transcript line-by-line, created a clear metric schema (with human-friendly questions), and coded values only when explicitly supported by the text. Where transcripts did not support a value, we recorded -1 (unknown). We normalized encodings across co-ops and produced evidence notes with transcript line citations where possible.\par
\par
\b Chapter 2: Narrative Findings by Category\b0\par
\b Membership and Constituency\b0\par
\i How many members are currently in good standing?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 17; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 250; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 46\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L37]\par
Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): [manynations.txt L49]\par
RTZ (Artists Co-op): [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L14-L14]\par
\i By what percentage has membership grown since founding?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i What percent of founding members are still active today?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Founding and Timeline\b0\par
\i In what year was the cooperative formally established?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 2017; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2014; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L25]\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L13-L13]\par
\i How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 36; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 120; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L25]\par
\par
\b Governance and Leadership\b0\par
\i How many directors currently serve on the board?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Employment and Jobs\b0\par
\i How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 10; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L31]\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L15]\par
Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): [manynations.txt L43]\par
\i How many part-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 20; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2\par
Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): [manynations.txt L43]\par
\i How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 30; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Finance and Financial Discipline\b0\par
\i Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 5; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2\par
RTZ (Artists Co-op): [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L59]\par
\i How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 12; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 12; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L307]\par
\i Are available lines of credit sufficient for planned operations?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Partnerships and External Support\b0\par
\i How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 6; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L79-L97]\par
\i How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\i How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2\par
\par
\b Programs, Services, and Training\b0\par
\i How many new programs or services have been added since founding?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i How many training or workforce development programs are offered?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 30; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L33]\par
\par
\b Innovation and Offering Development\b0\par
\i How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\i How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 4; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4\par
\i Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Operations and Supply Chain\b0\par
\i Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 0; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 0; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Does the co-op employ non‑member workers to meet operational needs?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Are the co-op’s inputs sourced mainly from the local area?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Are the co-op’s outputs purchased mainly within the local community?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 0; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\par
\b Markets and Sales Channels\b0\par
\i How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 2; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\i Do most end customers buy directly from the co‑op, or mostly via distributors/retailers?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L70-L70]\par
\i What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1\par
\par
\b Technology and Digitization\b0\par
\i How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 2; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\par
\b Culture and Heritage\b0\par
\i In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\i How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 3; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3\par
\par
\b Geography and Participation\b0\par
\i What is the scope of the production footprint?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0\par
\par
\b Risk, Relations, and Adaptation\b0\par
\i How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 5; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 4; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): [allottees.txt L85-L397]\par
\i Are there significant government-related issues affecting business?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Are there significant tribe-related issues affecting business?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): -1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i Are there significant community-related issues affecting business?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): -1; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i How many discrete risk‑mitigation strategies are in place?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): -1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): -1\par
\i How many adaptations address climate or market shifts?\i0\par
Allottees (E’ Numu Diip): 3; DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4; Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1; RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1\par
\par
\b Chapter 3: Summary of Key Findings\b0\par
Overall, the co-ops vary widely in maturity and scope. Many Nations shows strong scale (250 members, national footprint) and formal cadence. RSF demonstrates deep programmatic innovation and external logistics, with sales through distributors and national scope. Allottees shows strong planning and governance intent with explicit risk limits (no mortgaging) and local footprint. RTZ exhibits community engagement and partnership breadth but has many unknowns due to formative stage.\par
\b Interview Prompt Candidates (all -1 across co-ops)\b0\par
- Membership and Constituency: By what percentage has membership grown since founding?\par
- Membership and Constituency: What percent of founding members are still active today?\par
- Governance and Leadership: How many directors currently serve on the board?\par
- Employment and Jobs: How many part-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?\par
- Finance and Financial Discipline: Are available lines of credit sufficient for planned operations?\par
- Programs, Services, and Training: How many training or workforce development programs are offered?\par
- Risk, Relations, and Adaptation: Are there significant tribe-related issues affecting business?\par
}
