{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\b Indigenous Cooperative Systems: A Comparative Report\b0\par
Executive Summary. We compare four Indigenous cooperatives across membership, finance, operations, partnerships, markets, technology, culture, geography, and risk. The throughline is coherence: the healthiest systems align governance, cadence, partnerships, and capital with community purpose. Many Nations scales a national member-owned brokerage with disciplined review and product fit; RSF rebuilds fisheries economics by replacing extractive intermediaries with transparent, community-centered value chains; Allottees asserts land-first governance and conservative risk, converting planning into operational prototypes; RTZ channels a vibrant artist ecosystem into emerging markets that now require formal scaffolding. Findings derive from normalized metrics and direct quotations with line citations.\par\par
\b Methods\b0\par
Methods. We coded a common schema from four interviews. Only evidence-supported values were recorded; unknowns were assigned -1. We normalized encodings and preserved evidence notes with inline citations (e.g., [file Lx-Ly]). Quotes are reproduced verbatim with ASCII-only normalization for portability.\par\par
\b Part I: Case Studies\b0\par
\b Allottees (E' Numu Diip)\b0\par
Allottees (E' Numu Diip) reports 17 members, revenue bracket code 1, and a formal review cadence
of 12 per year. Staffing mixes indicate full-time 0 and contract -1; partnerships total 6, with
grants 4 supporting growth. Innovation is active (new practices 4, offerings 4), alongside
cultural integration (3) and preservation initiatives (3). Operationally, equipment
ownership/lease status is 0, external processing 0, and nonmember labor use 1. Challenges (5)
and adaptations (3) frame near-term priorities.\par
Interpretation. Allottees (E' Numu Diip) illustrates how mission and pacing interact with market
structure. Where values are -1, we flag them as explicit prompts for future interviews rather
than gaps in performance.\par\par
\b DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op)\b0\par
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) reports 5 members, revenue bracket code 5, and a formal review cadence
of 4 per year. Staffing mixes indicate full-time 2 and contract 2; partnerships total 6, with
grants 2 supporting growth. Innovation is active (new practices 4, offerings 6), alongside
cultural integration (4) and preservation initiatives (3). Operationally, equipment
ownership/lease status is 1, external processing 1, and nonmember labor use 1. Challenges (5)
and adaptations (4) frame near-term priorities.\par
Interpretation. DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) illustrates how mission and pacing interact with market
structure. Where values are -1, we flag them as explicit prompts for future interviews rather
than gaps in performance.\par\par
\b Many Nations (Insurance Co-op)\b0\par
Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) reports 250 members, revenue bracket code 5, and a formal review
cadence of 12 per year. Staffing mixes indicate full-time 10 and contract 20; partnerships total
3, with grants 1 supporting growth. Innovation is active (new practices 3, offerings 3),
alongside cultural integration (2) and preservation initiatives (2). Operationally, equipment
ownership/lease status is 0, external processing -1, and nonmember labor use -1. Challenges (4)
and adaptations (1) frame near-term priorities.\par
Interpretation. Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) illustrates how mission and pacing interact with
market structure. Where values are -1, we flag them as explicit prompts for future interviews
rather than gaps in performance.\par\par
\b RTZ (Artists Co-op)\b0\par
RTZ (Artists Co-op) reports 46 members, revenue bracket code 2, and a formal review cadence of
-1 per year. Staffing mixes indicate full-time 0 and contract 2; partnerships total 5, with
grants 2 supporting growth. Innovation is active (new practices 3, offerings 4), alongside
cultural integration (3) and preservation initiatives (3). Operationally, equipment
ownership/lease status is -1, external processing -1, and nonmember labor use -1. Challenges (5)
and adaptations (1) frame near-term priorities.\par
Interpretation. RTZ (Artists Co-op) illustrates how mission and pacing interact with market
structure. Where values are -1, we flag them as explicit prompts for future interviews rather
than gaps in performance.\par\par
\b Part II: Comparative Narrative\b0\par
\b Membership and Constituency\b0\par
Membership and Constituency reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Empirically, How many members are currently in good standing? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 17,
DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 250, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 46.\par
Qualitatively, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many members are currently in good standing? =
17.\par
Viewed comparatively, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many members are currently in good
standing? = 5.\par
Programmatically, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many members are currently in good
standing? = 250.\par
As a result, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many members are currently in good standing? = 46.\par
Taken together, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Founding and Timeline\b0\par
Founding and Timeline reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. Looking ahead,
In what year was the cooperative formally established? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2017, DM,
RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2014. In short, How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 36, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 120.\par
Empirically, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), In what year was the cooperative formally
established? = 2017; How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 36.\par
In parallel, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), In what year was the cooperative formally established?
= 2014; How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 120.\par
Strategically, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Governance and Leadership\b0\par
Governance and Leadership reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Methodologically, Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals? -> Allottees (E' Numu
Diip): 1. Prospectively, Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0.\par
Looking ahead, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Is continuity dependent on one or two key
individuals? = 1; Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? = 0.\par
Viewed comparatively, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's
thesis, constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test
for coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Employment and Jobs\b0\par
Employment and Jobs reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. Quantitatively,
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 10, RTZ
(Artists Co-op): 0. Historically, How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on
a paid basis? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 20, RTZ (Artists
Co-op): 2. Importantly, How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 30.\par
As a result, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ
(exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0; How many total jobs has the co-op created across its
communities? = 0.\par
Strategically, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ
(exclude contractors and advisors)? = 2; How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are
engaged on a paid basis? = 2.\par
From a governance perspective, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many full-time employees
does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 10; How many contractors,
consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 20; How many total jobs has the co-op
created across its communities? = 30.\par
Historically, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many full-time employees does the co-op employ
(exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0; How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are
engaged on a paid basis? = 2.\par
Empirically, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Finance and Financial Discipline\b0\par
Finance and Financial Discipline reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Financially, Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip):
1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 5, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. On the
ground, How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? -> Allottees (E' Numu
Diip): 12, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 12.\par
Empirically, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?
= 1; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12.\par
Put plainly, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? =
5; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 4.\par
Empirically, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual
revenue? = 5; How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12.\par
Qualitatively, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? =
2.\par
Viewed comparatively, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's
thesis, constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test
for coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Partnerships and External Support\b0\par
Partnerships and External Support reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Qualitatively, How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 6, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ
(Artists Co-op): 5. Financially, How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been
secured? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-
op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2. Culturally, How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?
-> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Viewed comparatively, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many active external partner
organizations does the co-op work with? = 6; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?
= 3; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 4.\par
Methodologically, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many active external partner organizations
does the co-op work with? = 6; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 4; How many
distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 2.\par
Crucially, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many active external partner organizations
does the co-op work with? = 3; How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been
secured? = 1.\par
Put plainly, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many active external partner organizations does the
co-op work with? = 5; How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 3; How many distinct
grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 2.\par
In practice, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Programs, Services, and Training\b0\par
Programs, Services, and Training reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Qualitatively, How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? -> DM,
RSF (Fishery Co-op): 30, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4. Quantitatively, How many new programs or
services have been added since founding? -> Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1.\par
Financially, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many community engagement events or workshops has
the co-op organized? = 30.\par
Empirically, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many new programs or services have been
added since founding? = 1.\par
Programmatically, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many community engagement events or workshops has
the co-op organized? = 4.\par
Put plainly, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Innovation and Offering Development\b0\par
Innovation and Offering Development reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Prospectively, How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ
(Artists Co-op): 3. Taken together, How many new products or services has the co-op launched
since founding? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations
(Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4. Looking ahead, Does the co-op offer products
uniquely difficult to source elsewhere? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0.\par
Crucially, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms
has the co-op developed? = 4; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since
founding? = 4; Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere? = 0.\par
Quantitatively, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or
platforms has the co-op developed? = 4; How many new products or services has the co-op launched
since founding? = 6.\par
Put plainly, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or
platforms has the co-op developed? = 3; How many new products or services has the co-op launched
since founding? = 3.\par
Importantly, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has
the co-op developed? = 3; How many new products or services has the co-op launched since
founding? = 4.\par
Strategically, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Operations and Supply Chain\b0\par
Operations and Supply Chain reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. To be
precise, Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a
single member to afford alone? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1, Many
Nations (Insurance Co-op): 0. Historically, Does the value chain rely on external processing,
warehousing, or certification? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. As a
result, Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs? -> Allottees (E'
Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. To be precise, Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly
from the local area? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1.\par
Crucially, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Does the value chain rely on external processing,
warehousing, or certification? = 0; Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that
would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0; Does the co-op employ nonmember
workers to meet operational needs? = 1.\par
As a result, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Does the value chain rely on external processing,
warehousing, or certification? = 1; Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that
would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 1; Does the co-op employ nonmember
workers to meet operational needs? = 1; Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly from the local
area? = 1; Are the co-op's outputs purchased mainly within the local community? = 0.\par
In practice, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production
equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0.\par
Importantly, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Markets and Sales Channels\b0\par
Markets and Sales Channels reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. Viewed
comparatively, How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? -> Allottees (E'
Numu Diip): 2, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-
op): 3. In short, Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via
distributors/retailers? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists
Co-op): 1. Prospectively, What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province,
national, international)? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, RTZ
(Artists Co-op): 1.\par
On the ground, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does
the co-op have? = 2; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via
distributors/retailers? = 1; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province,
national, international)? = 1.\par
Looking ahead, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the
co-op have? = 2; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via
distributors/retailers? = 2; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province,
national, international)? = 5.\par
In parallel, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams
does the co-op have? = 1.\par
Crucially, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op
have? = 3; Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via
distributors/retailers? = 1; What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province,
national, international)? = 1.\par
In parallel, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Technology and Digitization\b0\par
Technology and Digitization reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Operationally, How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? ->
Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ
(Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Qualitatively, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many distinct digital tools are used in
operations and marketing? = 2.\par
Financially, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations
and marketing? = 4.\par
Looking ahead, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in
operations and marketing? = 2.\par
Financially, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and
marketing? = 3.\par
Looking ahead, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Culture and Heritage\b0\par
Culture and Heritage reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. Historically,
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? -> Allottees (E' Numu
Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.
Crucially, How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? -> Allottees (E' Numu
Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 3, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Looking ahead, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), In how many concrete ways are traditional or
cultural values integrated? = 3; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? =
3.\par
Programmatically, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or
cultural values integrated? = 4; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? =
3.\par
On the ground, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or
cultural values integrated? = 2; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? =
2.\par
Taken together, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural
values integrated? = 3; How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3.\par
Programmatically, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's
thesis, constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test
for coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Geography and Participation\b0\par
Geography and Participation reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives.
Qualitatively, Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? -> DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op):
1, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 0. Prospectively, What is the scope
of the production footprint? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1.\par
Quantitatively, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), What is the scope of the production footprint? =
1.\par
Quantitatively, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Are multiple tribes or communities formally
involved? = 1.\par
From a governance perspective, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), Are multiple tribes or
communities formally involved? = 1.\par
To be precise, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? =
0.\par
Crucially, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Risk, Relations, and Adaptation\b0\par
Risk, Relations, and Adaptation reveals patterned differences across the four cooperatives. As a
result, How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip):
5, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5.
Crucially, How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip):
3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1.
Historically, Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? -> Allottees
(E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1. Stepping back, How many discrete riskmitigation
strategies are in place? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2.\par
Programmatically, For Allottees (E' Numu Diip), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are
recognized? = 5; Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1; How
many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? = 3; How many adaptations address climate
or market shifts? = 3.\par
As a result, For DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are
recognized? = 5; Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1; Are
there significant community-related issues affecting business? = 1; How many discrete
riskmitigation strategies are in place? = 2; How many adaptations address climate or market
shifts? = 4.\par
Crucially, For Many Nations (Insurance Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are
recognized? = 4; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1.\par
Viewed comparatively, For RTZ (Artists Co-op), How many persistent challenges or obstacles are
recognized? = 5; How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1.\par
As a result, Metrics here act as signals, whose meaning depends on the cooperative's thesis,
constraints, and time horizon. Interview prompts should target unknowns (-1) and test for
coherence among governance, cadence, and capital.\par\par
\b Part III: Synthesis and Recommendations\b0\par
Coherence predicts resilience: designs that align mission with governance and market pacing
outperform scale-chasing models. Many Nations: continue national channel expansion; invest in
Indigenous workforce pipelines linked to product innovation. RSF: scale distribution while
preserving story-forward branding and transparent bidding to lock in trade reform gains.
Allottees: prioritize capitalization of enabling infrastructure (water, solar, fencing) and
codify finance cadence and contingency. RTZ: formalize inventory, scheduling, and partner
finance to convert community momentum into reliable market presence.\par
}
