{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\b Co-op Comparative Outcome Report (v0.2.1)\b0\par
\b Chapter 1: Method\b0\par
We read four interview transcripts and coded a standardized set of metrics using clear, human-first questions. Values were recorded only when explicitly supported by the transcript. Unknowns were set to −1. We normalized encodings, attached evidence notes with citations, and recoded conservatively to avoid over-assertion.\par\par
\b Chapter 2: Comparative Narrative\b0\par
Membership tells us who is actually in the room. Allottees reports 17 members in good standing today, a number anchored in specific allotments and a family-centered governance model. RSF is lean by design—five founding members—but works with two to three times as many client communities, signalling a broader operational footprint than the formal member count suggests. Many Nations stands apart at roughly 250 members, representing Indigenous organizations across the country. RTZ’s membership sits in the high thirties to mid‑forties depending on youth apprenticeships, reflecting both growth potential and the reality of an early‑stage artists’ cooperative. In short, Many Nations brings national scale, RSF brings deep networks despite a small member core, Allottees brings place‑based legitimacy, and RTZ brings a growing creative community.\par\par
Financially, we see three different operating temperatures. RTZ places itself in the $25–50k range—consistent with a small gallery balancing consignment and events—while Allottees also sits in the lower bracket, reflecting a project phase funded by leases and grants. RSF and Many Nations code into the top bracket, but in very different ways: RSF’s earnings flow from engineered value‑added seafood lines and logistics services, while Many Nations’ brokerage model aggregates demand and returns surpluses to member organizations. Discipline shows up in cadence: Allottees reconciles monthly; RSF meets quarterly; Many Nations operates on monthly/quarterly/annual cycles; RTZ’s cadence is informal—consistent with its formative stage. The implication is straightforward: Many Nations and RSF are operationally ‘warm’ and externally oriented; Allottees is building structure; RTZ is investing in community presence before formal finance.\par\par
Employment underscores maturity. Many Nations employs roughly 10 full‑time staff and works with about 20 independent advisors, making it the largest direct job creator among the four. RSF runs with two full‑time and two contractors, choosing a lean core and scaling through partners. Allottees reports no full‑time staff, relying on consultants; RTZ engages contractors and volunteers as needed. The labor picture aligns with each strategy: Many Nations’ nationwide brokerage requires service capacity; RSF’s innovation‑plus‑logistics model leans on external processing and distribution; Allottees and RTZ are still investing in systems, not headcount.\par\par
Partnerships reveal networks. Allottees cites about six active partners (e.g., NW Cooperative Development Center, USDA programs), RSF about six (processing plants, banks, distributors), Many Nations three core allies (e.g., AFOA, CCAB, Cooperatives First), and RTZ five (Cooperative Catalyst, the local Main Street program, Ashford College, Kellogg, and a youth apprenticeship partner). RSF’s network is explicitly national and logistics‑heavy; Allottees’ partners are development‑oriented; RTZ’s profile is community‑capacity focused; Many Nations’ partners are institutional and policy‑oriented. This maps directly to where each co‑op spends its energy: building markets, building land‑based capacity, building artists, or building benefits at scale.\par\par
Innovation shows up differently in each case. RSF’s portfolio is the most engineered: a bidding platform that disintermediates predatory brokers, QR‑coded traceability and stories, and product formats designed for national distributors. Allottees’ innovations are land‑system innovations—rotational grazing tests, a seed farm vision, micro‑solar—more about production ecology than software. Many Nations innovates in benefit design (e.g., a Wellness Account and an Education Fund that invest back into member capacity). RTZ’s innovations revolve around community supply (apprenticeships, workshops, events) that grow the creative market from the ground up. These are divergent paths, each coherent with mission and context.\par\par
Cultural grounding is pervasive. RSF frames food security and stewardship as first principles, reconnecting river peoples to fisheries and reversing a century of mixed‑stock exhaustion. Many Nations designs products with an Indigenous lens in mind—e.g., traditional wellness spending accounts—so benefits match cultural practice. Allottees centers Indigenous land governance in every choice—from water rights to ‘no mortgaging’—treating land as an intergenerational trust rather than collateral. RTZ’s mission is literally to return value and voice to artists within their own tribal economy. The variation reflects different terrains—seafood, insurance, land, arts—but the through‑line is sovereignty as practice, not slogan.\par\par
Risk and relations are starkest in RSF’s fight with predatory brokers and in Allottees’ confrontation with water rights and BIA stewardship. RSF’s model removes cash-suitcase brokering by forcing bids into the open and engineering costs end-to-end; Allottees’ model removes discretion from outside agencies by asserting landowner-first leasing and compliance. RTZ’s main risks are operational—burnout and volunteer fragility—while Many Nations faces the classic consumer co-op challenge: maintaining governance engagement at national scale. Adaptations reflect these realities: RSF’s climate/market adaptations are product and supply-chain pivots; Allottees’ are production and energy pivots; RTZ’s are service pivots (in-person to online); Many Nations’ are product design pivots (culturally relevant benefits).\par\par
\b Chapter 3: Key Findings\b0\par
Many Nations is healthiest by scale and cadence; RSF healthiest by operational coherence and market engineering; Allottees healthiest by governance posture and land logic (despite early-stage operations); RTZ healthiest by community energy and partnerships but needs structure and finance cadence.\par
}
