{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
\b Co-op Comparative Outcome Report (v0.2.3)\b0\par
\b Chapter 1: Method\b0\par
We coded metrics only when explicitly supported by the transcripts and marked unknowns as -1. Encodings were normalized across co-ops, and evidence notes include transcript citations. We then developed a comparative narrative designed for human readers, using direct excerpts and explicit reasoning.\par\par
\b Chapter 2: Comparative Narrative\b0\par
Membership and Constituency\par
How many members are currently in good standing? = 17. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many members are currently in good standing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many members are currently in good standing? = 5. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many members are currently in good standing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many members are currently in good standing? = 250. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many members are currently in good standing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many members are currently in good standing? = 46. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many members are currently in good standing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Founding and Timeline\par
In what year was the cooperative formally established? = 2017. How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 36. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on In what year was the cooperative formally established?, How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
In what year was the cooperative formally established? = 2014. How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op? = 120. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on In what year was the cooperative formally established?, How long from informal collaboration to formal co-op?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Governance and Leadership\par
Is continuity dependent on one or two key individuals? = 1. Is there a contingency plan for sudden key-person unavailability? = 0. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Employment and Jobs\par
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0. How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities? = 0. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 2. How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 2. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 10. How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 20. How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities? = 30. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?, How many total jobs has the co-op created across its communities?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)? = 0. How many contractors, consultants, or advisors are engaged on a paid basis? = 2. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many full-time employees does the co-op employ (exclude contractors and advisors)?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Finance and Financial Discipline\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 1. How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?, How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 5. How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 4. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?, How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 5. How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? = 12. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? = 2. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on Which bracket best describes current annual revenue?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Partnerships and External Support\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 6. How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 4. How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 3. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?, How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 6. How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 2. How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 4. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?, How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 3. How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with?, How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? = 5. How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? = 2. How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? = 3. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with?, How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Programs, Services, and Training\par
How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? = 30. Compared to RTZ (Artists Co-op), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many new programs or services have been added since founding? = 1. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized? = 4. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many community engagement events or workshops has the co-op organized?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Innovation and Offering Development\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 4. How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 4. Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere? = 0. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 4. How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 6. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 3. How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 3. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed?, How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? = 3. How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? = 4. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Operations and Supply Chain\par
Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0. Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? = 0. Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs? = 1. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone?, Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 1. Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? = 1. Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs? = 1. Are the co-op's inputs sourced mainly from the local area? = 1. Are the co-op's outputs purchased mainly within the local community? = 0. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone?, Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? = 0. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Markets and Sales Channels\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 2. Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 1. What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)? = 1. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers?, What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 2. Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 2. What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)? = 5. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers?, What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? = 3. Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? = 1. What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Technology and Digitization\par
How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 2. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 4. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 2. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing? = 3. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many distinct digital tools are used in operations and marketing?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Culture and Heritage\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 3. How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 4. How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 2. How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 2. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated?, How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? = 3. How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? = 3. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Geography and Participation\par
What is the scope of the production footprint? = 1. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 1. Compared to RTZ (Artists Co-op), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 1. Compared to RTZ (Artists Co-op), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved? = 0. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on Are multiple tribes or communities formally involved?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
Risk, Relations, and Adaptation\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5. How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 3. Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1. How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? = 3. Compared to DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op), Allottees (E' Numu Diip) differs on How many adaptations address climate or market shifts?, How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Allottees (E' Numu Diip): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5. How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 4. Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? = 1. How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place? = 2. Are there significant community-related issues affecting business? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) differs on How many adaptations address climate or market shifts?, How many discrete riskmitigation strategies are in place?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 4. How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) differs on How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized?, How many adaptations address climate or market shifts?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? = 5. How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? = 1. Compared to Allottees (E' Numu Diip), RTZ (Artists Co-op) differs on How many adaptations address climate or market shifts?. Interpretation: The pattern above is internally coherent for RTZ (Artists Co-op): metrics reinforce stated goals rather than conflict. Unknowns remain deliberate until stated in future interviews.\par\par
\b Chapter 3: Key Findings\b0\par
Many Nations shows organizational scale and cadence; RSF shows innovation and market engineering; Allottees shows governance posture and land logic; RTZ shows community energy and partnerships. Each path can be healthy when strategy and execution match.\par
}
