{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Arial;}}\fs22\pard\sa200\sb140
\b Indigenous Cooperative Systems: A Comparative Report \b0\par
Thesis. Organizational health is driven by coherence: governance, cadence, partnerships, and capital aligned to mission outperform raw scale.\par
We compare four Indigenous cooperatives on membership, finance, operations, markets, partnerships, culture, geography, and risk, using normalized metrics and selected quotes for nuance.\par
\b Methods \b0\par
We coded a shared schema from four interviews. Values were recorded only where supported; unknowns are -1. We cite only quotations and nuanced claims.\par
\b Part I: Case Studies \b0\par
\b Allottees (E' Numu Diip) \b0\par
Profile. Members: 17. Annual revenue bracket: 1. Financial reviews per year: 12.\par
Capacity. Full-time staff: 0; Contractors: -1; Partners: 6; Grants: 4.\par
Innovation and culture. New practices: 4; New offerings: 4; Cultural integration/preservation: 3/3.\par
Operations. Equipment: 0; External processing: 0; Nonmember labor: 1.\par
"Our Cooperative was formed in 2017 the E' Numu Allottee Association was formed in 2014" [allottees.txt L25]\par
Interpretation. The indicators above are read in relation to mission and pacing. Unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews.\par
\b DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op) \b0\par
Profile. Members: 5. Annual revenue bracket: 5. Financial reviews per year: 4.\par
Capacity. Full-time staff: 2; Contractors: 2; Partners: 6; Grants: 2.\par
Innovation and culture. New practices: 4; New offerings: 6; Cultural integration/preservation: 4/3.\par
Operations. Equipment: 1; External processing: 1; Nonmember labor: 1.\par
"PS: How long have you so you've been with a cooperative since the beginning? When did it start? DM: We were formally" [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L13]\par
Interpretation. The indicators above are read in relation to mission and pacing. Unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews.\par
\b Many Nations (Insurance Co-op) \b0\par
Profile. Members: 250. Annual revenue bracket: 5. Financial reviews per year: 12.\par
Capacity. Full-time staff: 10; Contractors: 20; Partners: 3; Grants: 1.\par
Innovation and culture. New practices: 3; New offerings: 3; Cultural integration/preservation: 2/2.\par
Operations. Equipment: 0; External processing: -1; Nonmember labor: -1.\par
"We have what 100. And oh, I should have I should have grabbed that number off the top of my head. We" [manynations.txt L49]\par
Interpretation. The indicators above are read in relation to mission and pacing. Unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews.\par
\b RTZ (Artists Co-op) \b0\par
Profile. Members: 46. Annual revenue bracket: 2. Financial reviews per year: -1.\par
Capacity. Full-time staff: 0; Contractors: 2; Partners: 5; Grants: 2.\par
Innovation and culture. New practices: 3; New offerings: 4; Cultural integration/preservation: 3/3.\par
Operations. Equipment: -1; External processing: -1; Nonmember labor: -1.\par
"KQ: Okay, do you have a ballpark number? How many members are in the coop? KE: Oh, I'm sure CG probably has" [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L14]\par
Interpretation. The indicators above are read in relation to mission and pacing. Unknowns (-1) are prompts for future interviews.\par
\b Part II: Comparative Narrative \b0\par
\b Membership and Constituency \b0\par
Membership and Constituency shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
How many members are currently in good standing? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 17, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 250, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 46.\par
Illustrative: "you mean of our co-op? Yes, please. Right now we only have 17. We are working on the bylaws still." [allottees.txt L37]\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Finance and Financial Discipline \b0\par
Finance and Financial Discipline shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
Which bracket best describes current annual revenue? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 5, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2.\par
How often are budgets/financials formally reviewed each year? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 12, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 12.\par
Illustrative: "KQ: Going on to the next section, which is the general business questions. Number 21. What is the cost current" [Interview with RTZ Leadership.txt L59]\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Partnerships and External Support \b0\par
Partnerships and External Support shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
How many active external partner organizations does the co-op work with? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 6, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5.\par
How many distinct grants or external funding sources have been secured? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 2.\par
How many partners are non-Indigenous organizations? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Illustrative: "Well, to begin with, we were assisted by the Northwest Cooperative Development Center out of Washington. Diane Gassaway, the executive" [allottees.txt L79-L97]\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Innovation and Offering Development \b0\par
Innovation and Offering Development shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
How many notable new practices, models, or platforms has the co-op developed? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
How many new products or services has the co-op launched since founding? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 4, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 6, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 3, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 4.\par
Does the co-op offer products uniquely difficult to source elsewhere? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0.\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Operations and Supply Chain \b0\par
Operations and Supply Chain shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
Does the co-op own, lease, or rent production equipment that would be difficult for a single member to afford alone? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 0.\par
Does the value chain rely on external processing, warehousing, or certification? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 0, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1.\par
Does the co-op employ nonmember workers to meet operational needs? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1.\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Markets and Sales Channels \b0\par
Markets and Sales Channels shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
How many primary, recurring revenue streams does the co-op have? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 2, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Do most end customers buy directly from the coop, or mostly via distributors/retailers? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1.\par
What is the main sales footprint (local, regional, state/province, national, international)? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1.\par
Illustrative: "PS: What strategies did or did you use or use to raise capital? DM: Oh, yes, we broke our business" [Interview with DM, RSF.txt L70]\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Culture and Heritage \b0\par
Culture and Heritage shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
In how many concrete ways are traditional or cultural values integrated? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
How many ongoing initiatives support cultural preservation? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 3, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 2, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 3.\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Risk, Relations, and Adaptation \b0\par
Risk, Relations, and Adaptation shows systematic differences that reflect strategy, not only maturity.\par
How many persistent challenges or obstacles are recognized? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 5, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 5, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 4, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 5.\par
How many adaptations address climate or market shifts? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 3, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 4, Many Nations (Insurance Co-op): 1, RTZ (Artists Co-op): 1.\par
Are there significant government-related issues affecting business? -> Allottees (E' Numu Diip): 1, DM, RSF (Fishery Co-op): 1.\par
Illustrative: "No, okay, because I don't think other cooperatives well. Where I live here Madras, there's a co op. It's a" [allottees.txt L85-L397]\par
Implication. The same metric can indicate capacity or constraint depending on thesis and constraints. Target unknowns in future interviews.\par
\b Part III: Synthesis and Recommendations \b0\par
Synthesis. Coherence correlates with resilience. Many Nations exhibits disciplined cadence and national scope; RSF reforms trade dynamics to enable small-scale fisheries; Allottees operationalizes land-first governance with conservative risk; RTZ converts community energy into markets needing formal scaffolding.\par
Recommendations. Many Nations: expand channels and invest in Indigenous workforce pipelines tied to product innovation. RSF: scale distribution while preserving transparent bidding and brand. Allottees: capitalize enabling infrastructure and formalize finance cadence and contingency plans. RTZ: formalize inventory, scheduling, and partner finance.\par
}
